Bombastic, calculating, emotionally unpredictable and adventurous, the Eleventh Doctor was the final incarnation of the Doctor's original regeneration cycle. By this point in his life, the Doctor's reputation had grown immense, attracting a new strain of conflicts. Wishing to withdraw from the dangers it created, he became a secretive and guileful individual for the sake of himself and those he held close. He engaged in a centuries-long struggle to the death against his enemies, including an assassination plot by the Silence.

This incarnation's most notable enemy was the Silence, who were responsible for destroying his TARDIS, causing the cracks in time, which eventually consumed the universe, which was restored with the Pandorica. His multi-century war with the Silence critically involved companions Amy Pond, Rory Williams and their daughter, River Song. Ultimately, the most significant defeat of the Silence required him to marry River in a wedding ceremony, but one that they both seemed to regard as genuine.

After the touch of a Weeping Angel robbed him of Amy and Rory, a heartbroken Doctor retired to Victorian London and associated himself with the "Paternoster Gang". During this period, he rediscovered a woman named Clara Oswald, whom he thought had died previously in the distant future; she once again died here. Fascinated by this "impossible girl", he set off to solve the mystery of her multiple lives, and take her on as his latest travelling companion. He discovered her to be part of his timeline, having entered it in order to save him from the Great Intelligence. In doing so, he revealed to her his secret incarnation, who had fought in the Time War.

With his previous incarnation, the Doctor revisited the Time War, and discovered that he and his past incarnations had actually saved the Time Lords from destruction, but lost knowledge of the event with only the Eleventh Doctor retaining his memories of what had actually happened. This allowed him to cleanse his hands of a genocide he never enacted and happily accept the incarnation he once renounced, becoming the first incarnation to know the truth of the Time War's conclusion.

The Eleventh Doctor spent the last nine hundred years of his life battling against the universe's deadliest forces to protect the planet of Trenzalore, which caused the Silence to be formed, with the Kovarian Chapter going back in his timeline to prevent him reaching Trenzalore, causing his body to grow old and weak. At the cusp of dying of old age, Clara convinced the Time Lords to grant him a new regeneration cycle, restoring his youth and triggering his eventual regeneration into his next incarnation, greatly changing his future.