River Song (born Melody Pond) was a "child of the TARDIS" and the wife of the Doctor, specifically his eleventh incarnation. She was human with Time Lord DNA, conceived by her parents, Amy Pond and Rory Williams, aboard the TARDIS as it travelled through the Time Vortex, and then raised and conditioned by the Silence. This gave her great strength, the ability to regenerate and a great understanding of the complex principles of time and space. She loved the Doctor, and shared a long-lasting relationship with him. River was one of the very few people who knew the Doctor's true name.

Melody was stolen from her parents as an infant by Madame Kovarian to become a weapon of the Silence in their war against the Doctor. After a later regeneration, she killed the Eleventh Doctor, but then broke her mental conditioning to give her remaining regenerations to revive his corpse. Before doing this, the Eleventh Doctor asked her - still using the name Melody Pond - to give a message to someone named River Song. When told the message, she replied with, "Well, I'm sure she knows." She then asked who River Song was, and learnt that she was River Song.

The Doctor and her parents left her to make her own way in the universe. With no connection to her family or the Silence, River became an archaeologist, ostensibly to track the Doctor through time. She crossed the Doctor's path on several occasions, generally with the result that she was meeting him at progressively earlier points in his own time stream. Hoping to avoid temporal paradoxes, the Doctor gave her a diary to keep track of their meetings and to prevent her from revealing "spoilers" to him about his own future.

Again forced by the Silence, she made a second attempt on the Eleventh Doctor's life. Though actually unsuccessful, she was convicted of his murder and spent many years in Stormcage Containment Facility for it — apparently to convince the universe that the Doctor actually was dead. This confinement was made more bearable by escaping frequently to go out on dates with the Doctor. She was eventually pardoned, due to there being no evidence that the Doctor ever existed, and became a Professor of Archaeology.

After a final adventure with the Twelfth Doctor which ended with them spending a twenty-four year long night at the Singing Towers of Darillium, she died saving the Tenth Doctor, Donna Noble, Strackman Lux, and the 4,022 people saved in the computer system in the Library. The Tenth Doctor saved her consciousness digitally to the Library's computer system CAL. This data echo desired a true goodbye from the Doctor, and persisted for some time.